Sleep apnea is one of the most common and
often overlooked respiratory disorders you'll
encounter as a respiratory therapist.
In this lesson, we're going to break it
down in
a way that helps you think clinically, not
just memorize
facts.
At its core, sleep apnea is a disorder of
breathing
during sleep, where airflow is either
reduced or completely stops.
The most common type, obstructive sleep
apnea,
happens when the upper airway collapses
repeatedly during sleep.
Central sleep apnea, on the other hand,
is a failure of the brain to send the
signal to breathe.
So what does that mean for your patient?
Repeated apneic events lead to
intermittent hypoxemia, hypercapnia,
and frequent arousals from sleep.
Over time, this contributes to daytime
fatigue,
cardiovascular strain, pulmonary
hypertension, and even
heart failure.
From an RT perspective, your job is to
recognize the
pattern.
Patients may present with loud snoring,
witnessed apneas,
morning headaches, excessive daytime
sleepiness, or
unexplained hypertension.
But remember, some patients won't look
obvious,
so you need to connect the dots.
Diagnostics are centered around
polysonography and the apnea-hypopnea index,
or AHI.
This tells you how severe the condition is
and guides treatment decisions.
Management is where you play a critical
role.
CPAP is the gold standard for obstructive
sleep apnea, and
patient compliance is everything.
You'll be responsible for mask fitting,
pressure titration,
troubleshooting, and patient education.
In some cases, BiPAP or adaptive
servoventilation may be used,
especially in more complex or central
cases.
Here's your board prep takeaway.
Think obstruction versus control.
Obstructive sleep apnea is a mechanical
airway problem.
Central sleep apnea is a neurological
control problem.
And both can lead to serious long-term
complications if untreated.
As you move through this lesson, focus on
connecting pathophysiology
to clinical presentation, diagnostics, and
intervention.
That's how you'll think like an RT, and
that's how
you'll pass your boards.